Jihoon: Hello, everyone! I think we can wait.
Jihoon: Few more minutes, and then begin.
Jihoon: Alright, 30 minutes in, I think we can kick this off.
Jihoon: Akash, are we alive?
Akash | ECH: We are left.
Jihoon: Cool, thank you.
Jihoon: Hello everyone, welcome to the…
Jihoon: 23rd fossil breakout. This one will be the last one before the next ACDC, where we will decide fossil inclusion.
Jihoon: So, I'd like to suggest to use this breakout to share our thoughts on fossil inflation after we share our development updates.
Jihoon: So, let's start with development updates.
Jihoon: Hello, Pooja. Does anyone want to go first?
Jihoon: And maybe I can go first, as usual.
Jihoon: So on my end, I'm working on the spec PR that rebases fossil onto Cloas. Tomai and I ask people about what do we think about fossil in Kalamsterdam.
Jihoon: Some gave us the feedback that they want to see fossils back on top of glass. I opened the draft PR when you see a fossil, but it was stale, so I opened a new one a couple of days ago. It's being reviewed, so please have a look when you have some time.
Jihoon: And… yep, that's all from my end.
Jihoon: Alright, so no updates from Lostar. Lostar's mainly working on EPBS, so it's great.
Jihoon: Mmm… Yeah, anyone want to go next?
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: I can go next.
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: I've just been working on the spec testing and moved it over from, EST to ELS. All… it took a little bit, but I have 9 test cases passing, so I'm just working on cleaning that up so I can add it to the PR.
Jihoon: Sounds great, that test case is running in red, right?
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: Yeah, it's… I've only tested on… well, I'm running Wreath and Hive and testing the fixtures through that. I haven't tested on any other clients yet.
Jihoon: Paul, sounds great. Thank you.
Jihoon: Yep, so tech was all the same, nothing special, but still working on a PBS, sounds great.
Jihoon: An APF fellow dropped a PR that implements Foso in Aragon. Do we have anyone from any Aragon, or anyone who's working on that PR?
Jihoon: By any chance?
Jihoon: Guess not. Okay.
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: I'm somewhat familiar, I can just talk about it for a second.
Jihoon: Oh, yes, please.
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: Yeah, so that's been done by… I think it's Fahil, Fahil? It sounds like he just finished up his implementation, and I've been working with him to try to get some interop testing going on, so… not too sure about his implementation and everything, but…
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: It sounds like he should be joining interop testing soon.
Jihoon: Sounds great, sounds great. So… If it works out, then we were gonna have, 3 EL client interop.
Jihoon: Which is great.
Jihoon: Yeah, I haven't fixed that,
Jihoon: the… the bug in the GAT yet. I will be mostly working on the spec.
Jihoon: PR, and then I will be traveling around
Jihoon: DevConnect, so not sure when I can finish it, but, I think, if you guys are…
Jihoon: continue working on that. I think you guys can try interop between Wrath and Aragon, and see if…
Jihoon: If it works.
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: Yeah, sounds good.
Jihoon: Great, thank you. Do we have any updates on metrics end?
Jihoon: So, Katya is not here.
Jihoon: Yes, Pele?
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: Katya went out for, I think, the last two weeks, and I had just heard back from her from today, so there's a few little tweaks we need to make, so… Not completely finished, but pretty close.
Jihoon: You mean metrics implementation?
Pelle Krabbenhoeft: Both the list of EL metrics and the implementation ref. I think we just have, like, some naming conventions to deal with right now, but… yeah.
Jihoon: Oh, cool, okay. Yeah, thanks for sharing.
Jihoon: Alright, I think… That's that, unless…
Jihoon: Anyone want to share their updates?
Jihoon: Hmm.
Jihoon: Share.
Jihoon: Alright, it seems that's that for our development updates.
Jihoon: Right, cool. Now, let's move on and share our thoughts on fossil in Kalamsterdam. We are in fossil breakout, but it really doesn't mean that you have to be pro-fossil, or we don't have to derive any conclusion either. We could use this time to do some
Jihoon: temperature check before ACD calls, so… Who wanna go first?
Mehdi Aouadi: Yeah, I can go first for… for tech team.
Mehdi Aouadi: So basically, we are, we, we think, we still think the same, since we've,
Mehdi Aouadi: gave our feedback for the Glamsterdam headliners. We definitely think that Fossil, is the next EIP that should be SFI'd.
Mehdi Aouadi: So, we are a little bit concerned for EPBS and the added complexity that it will introduce, so…
Mehdi Aouadi: I think once we have at least a first EPBS working DevNet, we can definitely
Mehdi Aouadi: voice for, for, for, for merging the, the, the faster spec PR into, the constant spec, so…
Mehdi Aouadi: That's the only thing that we are,
Mehdi Aouadi: a little bit, concerned about, basically, how it would, be with the EPBS. So, yeah, but for now, we did some good progress in EPBS. We still not have, a, a working implementation, but hopefully,
Mehdi Aouadi: As soon as we have one, we definitely, we definitely want to, to,
Mehdi Aouadi: fossil to be acidified. So, yeah, that's… and now we will share our thoughts on that.
Mehdi Aouadi: Before the next, ACDC, I guess.
soispoke: Hi, just so I understand, do you…
soispoke: Do you feel like it will… will you be even more comfortable, like, delaying the decision, or do you think it's just, like, fine to have a decision, this week, and…
soispoke: Like, because it seems like you… yeah, I'm not sure exactly what you have.
Mehdi Aouadi: In my understanding, we need to… I mean, the CL teams are asked to give a feedback on the next, consensus score, right? Yeah. Just to be sure, yeah. So, yeah, our feedback… and… yeah, our feedback is definitely that we can include, fossil.
Mehdi Aouadi: Should we voice that…
Mehdi Aouadi: in my understanding, do we need, like, to say if we want it to be SFI'd, during that call, or should we just give a feedback on…
soispoke: Yeah, I think the idea is to…
soispoke: to make choices about EAPs.
soispoke: client teams think should be SFI'd.
soispoke: So… Yeah, I mean, from my… what I understood, like.
soispoke: Clients are, like, asked for, like, a sort of, like, decision on what EIPs they would want to specify.
Mehdi Aouadi: Yeah, then our decision would be definitely, we could decide,
Mehdi Aouadi: with the condition that we… I mean, EPBS should… should… is the headliner and should be the… the…
Mehdi Aouadi: the most important EIP, like, to implement, if it really makes things hard and, could delay PBS, maybe…
Mehdi Aouadi: We should reconsider that, but… For now, we think that it's… it's doable, and…
Mehdi Aouadi: Yeah, I think… I think we would be okay to SFI it.
soispoke: Okay, yeah, that's… that's clear, thanks. Maybe one thing that's not only for… for you, but, like, generally, like.
soispoke: I feel like… the notion of delaying EPBS with forceful.
soispoke: I mean, it will introduce some delays, I think, so…
soispoke: I feel like… I don't know if it's fair to say
soispoke: Yeah, I don't know. I'm just struggling with the idea of, like, for example, saying, we want to SFI fossil, but as long as it doesn't introduce delays.
soispoke: Just because of the fact that it's, you know, additional code and logic that needs to be, shipped. So I think it should be framed as, like, how…
soispoke: How long, you know, how much of a delay are we ready to…
soispoke: to accept for it to be SFI'd, or… or… and then after that delay, it should be dropped, so it doesn't, like, you know, actually delay PBS and, like, headliners, generally, like, further than this. But just… just suggest… suggesting, like, it might be worth
soispoke: thinking along these terms as well.
soispoke: But, yeah, just wanted to know what people thought.
soispoke: And see, can you remind me what was Lodestar exactly saying? Because I'm trying to find the docs, but .
NC: Yeah, it was a blog post, yeah, basically supporting EPUS and Foso together.
NC: But also, you know, since, like, last ACDC, there have been, you know, a lot of new EIP candidates, so we still need to go through them.
NC: And see if, like, our opinion has changed.
soispoke: That makes sense. Cool. Thanks.
Jihoon: Great, great. Do we have any other comments?
Jihoon: If you want to express your personal opinion, that's also… very welcomed, so, shit.
Jihoon: So Nethermine's also pro-fossil for Klamsterdam.
Jihoon: Though it's hard to say what the trade-off is.
Jihoon: with a delayed BDS.
Jihoon: So it seems we have
Jihoon: more devs here from several teams. Maybe we can ask
Jihoon: Maybe it's not a good question, but maybe we can ask, how much delay do we think acceptable?
Jihoon: like, in… when we… if I did, the estimation was… Like, 2 months.
Jihoon: then, let's say we're gonna delay PBS for 2 months, I mean, Amsterdam. Then, do we think that's… okay.
Jihoon: like… Yeah.
Jihoon: Can we get some frame that…
Jihoon: Fossil is fine, as long as it doesn't delay up to… X month.
Jihoon: Or do we even need that?
Jihoon: So, 3 months would be the delay.
Jihoon: And… Hmm.
soispoke: Yeah. Well, I can give a personal opinion, I guess. Obviously a bit biased, but
soispoke: No, we've had actually quite a lot of discussions
soispoke: around this, internally, I guess, DEF.
soispoke: And I would say opinions are split.
soispoke: And yeah, as I already said, I guess, like, on ACD or whatever, but there are some…
soispoke: Researchers and devs at the end that Just, like, really want to…
soispoke: Ship on a, like, very regular, strict cadence.
soispoke: And others that think it's fine, delaying a fork by a bit, if it's to include, like, an important feature.
soispoke: I sit, like, in the second camp, I guess, but it's not, like, a very popular opinion, I guess. And…
soispoke: Yeah,
soispoke: my worry is that… and so, yeah, I have to say that I guess the more consensual, like, more broad… broader, like, opinion at DF is to ship fossil for the H…
soispoke: start fork.
soispoke: But I do think there's just, like, a lot of uncertainty when talking about, like, future forks. I think we've seen that in the past.
soispoke: And…
soispoke: yeah, I always basically think it's completely fine, you know, if we come to the edge fork, and for some technical reasons, full soul is not a priority anymore, and then it's delayed again, or whatever, like, that's all good, because,
soispoke: Because it's a technical reason, like, it means priorities have shifted, and core devs, and, like, the community, like, thinks it's not as important anymore.
soispoke: But, yeah, as I said last time, I think they're all…
soispoke: non-technical reasons that could also affect, an IP, like, like, Fossil.
soispoke: And… that's why my position is… basically strongly…
soispoke: Programs for them, just because…
soispoke: I want to de-risk it. And it's a hard sell, because Fossil is a very, like, defensive sort of, like, EIP, like, it won't really drastically…
soispoke: change UX, for example, for users.
soispoke: Compared to, I don't know, scaling AIPs, for example.
soispoke: But, yeah, I want to de-risk it, so we don't…
soispoke: End up, like, having the exact same discussion for…
soispoke: For future folks, and maybe,
soispoke: Getting into a point where it's just, like, harder.
soispoke: from, like, a… I don't know.
soispoke: political environment perspective, let's say, to ship it, which would be a shame, because then it wouldn't be for technical reasons.
soispoke: But, yeah, I've said this already,
soispoke: Does anyone here, like, have, like, Other arguments, because,
soispoke: I feel like, we could also, like, go back to maybe, like, some technical…
soispoke: decisions. One thing I said that was, yeah, I think interesting is, like, what do you guys… would you guys agree that,
soispoke: like, repricing EIPs should be implemented by the EL folks after.
soispoke: sort of, like, EPBS and bells are, like, stabilized, which would give us maybe some time
soispoke: To ship fossil.
soispoke: Or is that just not the right way to think about this?
soispoke: Do you have an idea, Jihoon? Like, or anyone else, yeah?
Jihoon: I was thinking about, like.
Jihoon: do I have any good answer regarding…
Jihoon: the question of repricing EIP, and…
Jihoon: that was the moment Justin came in, because I asked him about, like, what do we want to prioritize when it comes to repricing versus fossil.
Jihoon: Yeah, I…
Jihoon: Honestly, I don't have a good answer to that question, but if I were to share my thoughts on fossil in Kalamsterdam.
Jihoon: Of course, Yeah, like.
Jihoon: I mean, it's cold, so I wanna see Fossil in Amsterdam, because…
Jihoon: The community has been signaled strong preferences for fossil inclusion.
Jihoon: And I think the main argument against Fossil is that
Jihoon: It was gonna delay the fork, which is true.
Jihoon: But…
Jihoon: I believe majority of people agree that we want fossil, so let's have it in HECA, but I think the same argument would be applied in HECA as well. It touches both layers, it's not crystal clear which of the three goals it belongs to.
Jihoon: The interaction with the headliner, whatever that be, is unknown, so we should have it in… let's say, iFork.
Jihoon: But the thing is, the later we want to have it, the more difficult it'll become.
Jihoon: And I'm in a camp that I believe we all want to add more value to Ethereum.
Jihoon: And, yeah, basically, I just think that having fossilink in Amsterdam is a way to achieve it.
Jihoon: But we also need to consider other EIPs.
Jihoon: Such as repricing, and when it comes to that question.
Jihoon: I'll defer others to, you know, share our good opinions on it.
Jihoon: So, yeah, maybe… I don't know, maybe ELDef here could provide us… some… insights?
Justin Florentine (Besu): So, I'm Justin from the Basi team, Yale Dev, right? And I think that…
Justin Florentine (Besu): The comparison between fossil and gas repricings, I don't find…
Justin Florentine (Besu): I don't find them very comparable, meaning that… They provide wildly different things.
Justin Florentine (Besu): And they are difficult in very different ways.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Meaning that fossil is difficult because it has to be done on both the EL and the CL. It has some interactions with EPBS. EPBS makes it,
Justin Florentine (Besu): a little bit easier, right? Gas repricings, on the other hand, can be shipped in a lot of different ways. There's a ton of different EIPs, there's tons of different ways that you can bundle them together, and they're difficult because of a scheduling and testing.
Justin Florentine (Besu): burden.
Justin Florentine (Besu): They're difficult to schedule because they can be grouped in different ways, and those groups interact with each other in hard-to-reason-about manners.
Justin Florentine (Besu): So, for instance, we're supposed to, on Thursday, have a list of EIPs that are ready to go, or that, you know, your team thinks should be included in Glamsterdam. And, you know, my team doesn't have that yet, and if we did put a list together, it would be very low quality, because it's hard for us to reason about all these different categories of gas repricing and how they might interact.
Justin Florentine (Besu): That's going to directly translate into a testing burden when we try to ship the hard fork. So, you know, I don't find… I don't find the argument that, you know, there's no room for fossil because we have to do gas repricing
Justin Florentine (Besu): very compelling. And if I had to make my decision today, I would prioritize fossil over gas repricing, because I don't really see, you know, yeah, maybe the gas pricing today is suboptimal, but I don't know, it's been okay for a long time.
Justin Florentine (Besu): So, you know, that's kind of my perspective. I think that…
Justin Florentine (Besu): the only arguments that I've heard for gas repricing are that, well, this is a scaling hard fork, and it's thematically consistent. I don't find that compelling. We can do, you know, multiple things, at one time in one hard fork.
Justin Florentine (Besu): And I think scaling has had plenty of developer attention over the last, you know, 3 years or so. So, end rant.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Thank you for coming to my TED Talk.
soispoke: Thanks. I think that was interesting, thanks for sharing that. Would you… okay, one thing I needed, like, maybe some clarification on is, like.
soispoke: is it true that we, like, EPBS and BALS,
soispoke: like, need to be in their, let's say, final form, and sort of, like, not shipped on mainnet, but, you know, like, actually stable, before we can even consider doing the testing for repricing EIPs, because
soispoke: you know, you shift the… with the PBS, at least, you, you do…
soispoke: change the slot structure and the time allocated to execution, propagation and everything, so if you really want to fully
soispoke: sort of, like, optimize repricings for EPBS. For example, it feels natural that you'll set EPBS first, and then do repricings. Is that the way to think about it, or…
Justin Florentine (Besu): I don't really… I find those to be pretty orthogonal. I'll defer to POTUS on that, but I really don't really see any interrelation to them. I think wanting to do gas repricings after EPBS involves is just a way of saying, I want to do gas repricings as soon as possible. I really don't see any interaction there.
soispoke: Interesting.
Marc: I think in terms of block access lists and repricing, there could be quite a bit of interaction there.
Marc: Especially, like, around the testing effort, like, I think…
Marc: there's a lot of, very, kind of, specific EVM edge cases and block access lists that, kind of, also depend on gas pricing, so I can see that certainly from… in terms of testing, like, that'll be a bit complicated there.
Justin Florentine (Besu): But you don't… you don't imagine being able to paralyze a block getting expressed in gas pricing, do you?
Marc: No, this is just talking about the sort of block access list construction part, so kind of separate from the…
Marc: Parallel execution, just like…
Marc: Basically creating the list of all the, you know, state, reads, access, etc, and testing that is kind of very interlinked with the gas pricing schedule.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Hmm.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Okay.
Justin Florentine (Besu): I find that… not obvious, but I'll consider that.
Marc: Like, I'm not saying it's insurmountable or anything, I just think that, like.
Marc: There's gonna be a… for bowels and repricing, there's gonna be, like, a big testing effort, and there could be some kind of complexities that are… that overlap.
Marc: Yeah, I mean, personally, I don't see that as a…
Marc: problem for Fossil. I mean.
Marc: like, personally, I see it as quite a high-priority thing, so I don't…
Marc: mind if it delays the fork by a few months, but, we haven't really discussed this as a team yet, so I can't really speak as to what other people think.
soispoke: Okay, that makes sense. Yeah, thanks for sharing.
soispoke: I mean, okay, there is an alternative world in which, Possol… yes, it is cross-layered, but, like, it's still, like.
soispoke: Mostly lives on the, on the CL, by far.
soispoke: So…
soispoke: I mean, yeah, if you, you know, if people end up wanting to include, like, a lot of, gas repricing ZIP, and those will actually take time.
soispoke: And fossil mostly lives on the CL, maybe that's also an argument, too.
soispoke: Parallelized efforts between both. But,
soispoke: Yeah, because I do think for sale is quite minimal on the EL side of things.
Jihoon: It's just a dumb question, is there a…
Jihoon: Will there be an edit complexity coming from, overlapped.
Jihoon: Testing surface between Bells and fossil.
Marc: I mean, personally, I wouldn't think too much between bowels and fossil, because, yeah, I mean, fossil's mostly CL, right? And…
Marc: from… just off the top of my head, like, I think the kind of code changes don't touch most of the same stuff.
Jihoon: Good. Thank you. Potas, please.
potuz: Yeah, so…
potuz: I have a bunch of, like, random comments, mostly personal opinion. I, myself, want to see Fossil in Protocol. I think it's…
potuz: it's the property that blockchains provide, and we aren't providing sensitive resistance at the moment. So I do think that this is urgent to have in protocol.
potuz: I also think that, some, some… Some objective, comments,
potuz: We… it's clear that most core devs, if not all core devs, want to have fossil in protocol.
potuz: It's, also clear that, it interacts in a highly non-trivial manner with current EPBS for the current fork.
potuz: And, if there is some kind of consensus in having shorter slot times in the next work, it also interacts in a highly non-trivial way. With that actually might be the case that one would make it impossible for the other PR.
potuz: So I agree with Thomas that it is, at a point, it is just a political decision of whether it should be included or not.
potuz: So it's really a matter of, like, saying what are the priorities. But it should be clear that it could be the case
potuz: that having shorter slot times makes it impossible to have fossil, or it could be the case that having fossil now would make it impossible to have shorter slot times. And I think we should realize that this is the situation.
potuz: Or at least not the numbers that people are talking about with having 6-second slots.
potuz: Now, as for the…
potuz: complications of implementing and testing this. I have no clue, and I cannot speak for the EL teams. What is really clear is that the big overhaul of fossil is on the CL side.
potuz: And it's more than just the gas repricing and these kind of things, where the EL devs can start working already.
potuz: On the fossil side, we're very far from starting working already. I just saw the PR open on the EPBS side a few days ago when I saw it. It was just bare bones and was lacking a bunch of things, so we're… in the fossil side, we're really at the drawing board.
potuz: we're really at the specing board. Even EPBS, the spec for EPBS is not completely closed, there are some changes to purchase that are still needed to add, and so I think it's…
potuz: We are far away from being in a situation where we can actually say, yeah, this…
potuz: I mean, you can guess 3 months, 2 months, whatever it is, but we know that those timings are never going to work.
potuz: Whatever we say now, yeah, possibly it's going to delay for 2 months, for 3 months, it's just…
potuz: out of nowhere. Those numbers are out of nowhere. We have no clue how we're gonna start testing these things. And especially, both EPBS and Fossil are time-sensitive. We need to set up some timings, and we need to test
potuz: in a decentralized manner, we cannot test on a devnet, we need to test on a large testnet to even set those limits, and after we test, we're gonna find out if it actually works. It might be that we just don't have the space to have these messages floating around.
potuz: So…
potuz: So we need to admit that it's going to be complicated to test, it's going to be a lot of delay, not only of APBS, but of shorter slot times, and we need to be clear about what are our priorities. My priority would be to have Fossil, regardless of any kind of delay.
potuz: On the other hand, on the political side, I believe that client teams are already working on fossil, and they will work on fossil, regardless of whether or not it's SFI or not.
potuz: So… and people are not delayed on this. I mean, there's more people in… there were more people implementing Fosula a few weeks ago than people implementing EPVS.
potuz: So, I would expect that whatever happens on ACD, fossil will get implemented on top of EPBS anyways.
potuz: So I think it's… it can be realistic to continue working on this, and whenever we actually have an implementation, pressure to have it included immediately.
potuz: I know this is not something that people like, but I do believe that this is the thing that has the most chances of
potuz: Passing.
soispoke: Okay, thanks.
soispoke: I think, yeah, there are a lot of points. One of them was, that I'm particularly interested in is, also, like, why do you think, 6-second shorter slots
soispoke: might not be possible to ship with the PBS.
soispoke: Cause I, I wrote something… That makes it…
soispoke: Unlikely, but I was just wondering if you have, like, more thoughts on that?
potuz: No, no, an EPBS. With EPBS, I think it's possible. It's harder than with the current slot structure, but I think it's just perfectly possible. We did test already with the NetherMind guy's 6-second slots, and it was more stable with EPBS than without EPBS.
potuz: What I believe it's a complication is to add fossil on top of it, because it adds different deadlines.
potuz: And we just don't know how those deadlines interact yet.
soispoke: Okay, yeah, I mean, I agree, but, like, not knowing exactly how the deadlines will work out, but, like, the thing I shared, which, yeah, I think you read at the time.
soispoke: I mean, it's, like, basically the worst case scenario we can get into between Fossil and EPBS, but also between Fossil and shorter slots.
soispoke: Is that you might have…
soispoke: transactions in the inclusion list that are already, included. So, like, so not, like, the freshest inclusion lists ever, basically.
soispoke: But… that…
soispoke: would probably be the worst case. So it's always best, you know, to have, like, the freshest inclusion list based on, like, the latest head and whatever.
soispoke: But I do think that if you… even if you reduce, sort of, like, the slot time, and you have, like, tighter deadlines, for EPBS, and, like, how these interact, like, the worst case scenario you can get into is, like, not having the freshest IELTs, which is…
soispoke: in my opinion, fine. Like an okay trade-off to her, to have.
soispoke: But so, yeah, I just want to make sure, like, that's sort of, like,
soispoke: the right way to think about it, because if it's the case, it's different than saying, you know, they can't be shipped. Like, one can't be shipped without the other.
soispoke: So yeah.
soispoke: Okay, nice.
soispoke: Cool. And then about messages going around, I, I…
soispoke: Yeah, I agree, it's hard to predict exactly, but, like, you know, like, at the end of the day, like, the whole, sort of, like, inclusion list, like, 16 inclusion lists make up for, like, one blob of data that's going through the network, and I think, yeah, nodes can afford that.
soispoke: For sure.
soispoke: And how far could you reduce slot times without breaking
soispoke: Fossil. So, what I'm saying is, like, what I think, but, like, yeah, I mean, we can spend time on it and, like, iterate a bit more. What I think is, like, no amount of, slot times will break Fossil, because it just…
soispoke: It just will mean that you have Slots that update
soispoke: faster than you can produce, fresh inclusion lists, which is…
soispoke: not ideal, because it just means, like, a lot of, like, transactions in the inclusion list will already be included, but I don't think it's terrible.
soispoke: Yeah, at one point, I do think it might break, but, like, yeah, that's my view on it. Like, I don't think,
soispoke: Yeah, I don't think, like, you can break first all in a way, like, it just, like, Fossil will be a bit less efficient, in a way, because it won't only contain transactions that have never been included in previous blogs.
soispoke: Yep.
soispoke: Amid…
Mehdi Aouadi: Yeah, I just wanted to add that, maybe we should not reason with the, by the time estimation, and delays. Maybe we should remind the contributors that, about the, the, the EIP process itself.
Mehdi Aouadi: which, if I remember correctly, was reviewed a few months ago, and we said that for an EAP to get SFI'd, it should have some working implementation. And that's definitely the case today for Fossil. We have many CL and EL implementations, so…
Mehdi Aouadi: That's a good point. And another thing, in my opinion, delaying fossil would also make it harder to include in the future, because we will end up having some
Mehdi Aouadi: State branches, and diverging branches, and it's…
Mehdi Aouadi: Already with EPBS, it's getting hard, like, to rebase everything on top of it. If we keep delaying it, we will just add complexity, like, on maintaining the fossil implementation, so…
Mehdi Aouadi: Maybe we should also, emphasize that and remind the contributors that, yeah, Fossil checks all the boxes, like, to get SFI.
soispoke: Yeah, 100%. I think that those are, like, great arguments, too. Yeah, thanks for sharing.
soispoke: And then I, yeah, I guess I also agree with Potus that I… I mean, I also happen to think that…
soispoke: like, permissionlessness and censorship resistance, or, like, I guess, inclusion rights, are basically the… one of the super core properties, blockchains provide generally, so…
soispoke: I feel like, yeah, we shouldn't, make,
soispoke: We shouldn't think too hard about this one, but
soispoke: But yeah, I think it's great, like, those are, like, really good arguments.
soispoke: Yes.
potuz: Oh, I have a comment, a request that surely will not be popular in this crowd, but I think this is the right crowd to make this request. There are some components of fossil
potuz: on the EL, that, if ACD decides not to SFI fossil.
potuz: I would want to ask EL clients to anyways implement them, and we can adapt those components for EPBS.
potuz: if there is a transaction that is actively being censored, I mean, that's part of the… of constructing the inclusion list. The EL can find a transaction that is being censored, and can notify the CL that there is this transaction that should be included.
potuz: And EPBS allows for any validator to blacklist immediately all builders.
potuz: When there is such a transaction. So if I see a builder that is not included in a transaction, that my EL is telling me that transaction should have been included, Vanilla Software should be able, on EPBS, to not call anymore that builder.
potuz: And I think if fossil doesn't get accepted on ACD, we should push to have at least this
potuz: already implemented in EL clients, because I believe it's already implemented in EL clients, and for EPVS, it would only require a change in the engine API.
soispoke: that makes sense. I don't think that's a controversial statement to make. I mean, like, everything that can improve censorship resistance, I think, is good. The… I think one…
soispoke: Yeah, I have to think a bit harder, I feel like,
soispoke: The default for a lot of people will just… to…
soispoke: I mean, we haven't seen, like, any sort of, like, big pushback when builders started censoring transactions in the past.
soispoke: So I feel like leaning on reactivity.
soispoke: For, you know, big, for example, validator pools or whatever to…
soispoke: To change their behavior might also…
soispoke: Or would you suggest it's, like, a default thing that triggers automatically? Like, I don't know how you think about it. Like, will you request an actual action from the validator that wants to disconnect from a builder, or would it be something that triggers?
soispoke: This triggered automatically.
potuz: It should be something automatic. If you see a transaction that wasn't included, then by a builder… so, because the problem before was that we didn't know who the builder was, so you couldn't disconnect, because the relay could be saying, could be anything, could give the block to anyone.
potuz: So we had non-censoring relays in which censoring builders were winning the auction.
potuz: What changes with the PBS is that now anyone can see not only the proposer, but anyone can see who's built the block, and they can know immediately that they built a censoring block.
potuz: So if the EL is telling you that builder there did not include this transaction, just don't call it anymore. I think this should be the default on clients, and yes, people might want to fork it, or we might even…
potuz: see push to have a configuration plug to change this, and yes, this is not as strong as possible, of course, but…
potuz: Default stick.
potuz: And I think this is a good default to have anyways.
soispoke: Yep, I agree.
soispoke: Yeah, yeah, no, I think those make sense. I think defaults are sticky as well, which is also why I was pushing quite hard against having, like, an opt-in fossil.
soispoke: thing, but, yeah, I think the only other thing you would lose is, like, not having 16 people, doing that, and just, like, relying on your own, sort of.
soispoke: view, but yeah, always better than nothing. I don't think it's, yeah, controversial at all, I think everything that can be done to improve the, like, current state of things should be done, basically.
Jihoon: But that's something that we can also try.
Jihoon: even we… go with PBS with Fossil, right? Even if we don't… I mean, like, even if we…
Jihoon: decide to DFI fossil, we can still
Jihoon: use this component in the PBS, as you described.
Jihoon: I'm gonna replace it. Oh, is it? Okay.
Jihoon: Right, as a… as a… as a replacement, you mean? Okay.
soispoke: I mean, yeah, I mean, I agree it's not a fossil replacement, and it's not as strong at all, but, like, I mean, maybe there could also just be an EIP drafted for it.
soispoke: The only problem there is, like, it obviously won't… B.
soispoke: compliant with, some of the arguments that were really good, I think, and made by MIDI, that it won't be, you know, tested or have anything sort of, like,
soispoke: yeah, it will be very new and very fresh, but also not that complex, so I don't know.
Jihoon: Gotcha.
Jihoon: It's really great to have, yeah, Nico, do you want to share something?
nflaig: Yeah, I just want to know if there's a difference to the current should override builder that we have?
nflaig: I mean, I guess in EPBS, you could say, okay, the previous builder was censoring, so you blacklist that one.
nflaig: But what we have right now is we would just fall back to local blocks if the EL returns true for should overwrite.
nflaig: But I just haven't seen good adoption from the EL side on that. I'm only aware of NetherMind having this behind the feature flag.
potuz: Yeah, so it should be… it should be different, it should… that flag there is when you request a payload, to propose yourself, and then the EL tells you there's censorship going on, just build your… yourself.
potuz: What I'm thinking is a different one, which is already part of Fossil itself, is when you send a new payload, you're syncing a block, part of sending the payload, the reply, instead of, like, being just accepted or syncing or valid, should be, accepted, syncing valid, but it was a censoring payload.
potuz: And that's it, it's just a Boolean. And your EL has free rights to decide this payload was censoring or not.
potuz: and the CL can take care quickly out of that. You just send your payload when you're syncing, get the fact that it was a sensory payload.
potuz: And you know who the builder is, just blacklist that builder immediately.
potuz: So it doesn't really need an EIP either, because it's just on the engine API, it's not part of core protocol. I could write an EIP for this, but it's just changing the API.
Jihoon: Alright, it might be a… good mitigation we might want to have when we decide to DFI fossil.
Jihoon: So… Yeah, it's really great to have many…
Jihoon: Opinions and perspective on the table.
Jihoon: Yeah, if we decide, let's see how it goes.
Jihoon: We're almost hitting up one hour. Does anyone have more comments, feedback, or thoughts to share?
soispoke: No, just thinking about Botti's idea, then…
soispoke: There will still basically need to…
soispoke: yeah, come up with, like, a good heuristic to determine the transaction wasn't sold, because…
soispoke: It's also, you know, it's not an objective criteria, it's not like… it's not like your label is attached to a transaction, it's more like…
soispoke: it's been pending in the mempool for X amount of time and hasn't been included, so…
soispoke: That would be to be a bit more thought about, like, the heuristic people may want to use, but yeah, just a thought.
Jihoon: Yeah, that sounds like a… offable… strategy.
Jihoon: Alright, do we have any other comments we want to have?
Jihoon: Otherwise, I think we can go ahead and wrap up this call.
Jihoon: I mean… Alright then, thanks for joining, everyone. Hope you have a great rest of your day.
Jihoon: As always, I'm gonna share the summary of this call, but…
Jihoon: I'm not gonna name names on the opinions addressed in this call, so…
Jihoon: You don't need to worry about it.
Jihoon: Yeah, and let's see how it goes in the upcoming ACDC call, which is on November 13th, if I'm not wrong.
Jihoon: And… Place you in 2 weeks!
Jihoon: Thank you.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Thanks, Jan.
Mehdi Aouadi: That's right.
Marc: Right.
nflaig: Thank you.